---
title: On The Topic Of Discussion
layout: post
tag: Rambling
---

Everybody past the age of fifteen knows the danger in navigating the minefield of discussion. Few things ruin family dinners, job interviews or first dates quicker than bringing up your personal views about *insert controversial topic here*. At the same time there are some that are seemingly indifferent to anything at all, unfazed by even the most controversial of opinions. That everybody should - by law - bow before their superior overlord, the flying spaghetti monster, is fine by them. Of course most of us fall somewhere in the middle but it is an interesting dichotomy nonetheless - especially if you start to wonder at the reasons why. Some would say that we argue based on emotion and not rationality, which is true to some degree. Others would say that we argue entirely on our intuitions instead, rationalizing after the fact - which I think is getting closer to the truth. But, I would say that instead it being on the topic of rationality, it is on the topic of different definitions of basic psychological concepts.

The first psychological concept is the concept of Us/Them. Simplified, it is inflating the merits of arbitrary markers between two groups of people, the in-group and the out-group. Some would say that this is a part of human psychology to overcome or ignore, but I would say that it is impossible. It is as much a part of us as the lungs through where we breath. But just as there are different techniques through breathing, there are techniques to overcome specific problems of that intuitive process of Us/Them. Unchecked Us/Them-ing usually leads to increasing the distance between the in-group and out-group, decreasing the chance to ever gap that bridge metaphorically in your mind the longer you refuse to acknowledge that you are part of an Us. These rationalizations metastasize in a common pattern: Thems are often viewed as simpler and more homogeneous and interchangeable. It can also take place in humor; when an ingroup mocks an out-group it is to solidify negative stereotypes and reify the hierarchy. 

It is easy to make the claim that this implies that what I am saying is that being part of an Us will surely lead to Nazism - which couldn't be further from the truth. Us-es takes many different forms outside of politics, in family, friends and certain TV-show fandoms. Just as different breathing techniques can for example help towards calming anxiety, which requires conscious effort - we can overcome *some* of the intuitive tendencies in Us/Them, but we need to exercise conscious effort to ever hope to achieve that. Conscious effort in distrusting essentialism, and keeping in mind that what can seem like rationality is often just hidden rationalizations is a good start in attempting to bridge that metaphorical gap. Being part of an Us is not a bad thing, but refusing to accept that you are, along with the moral responsibilities that come with it is. In being part of an in-group you must at least try to see the out-group's perspective, from their shoes - not your own. 

So, what does this mean in relevance to the topic of discussion? I would argue that it explains the stifling of even slightly different opinions, along with the "eye-rolling" effect. But it is only a starting point toward where I want to go with this discussion.

The second concept is based on Us/Them but is instead focused on where our morality is formed, and as an effect how we use empathy. We judge ourselves by our internal motives and everyone else by their external actions. This is taken straight out of Us/Them - when Them does something wrong it is because they are all rotten; when Us do it, it's because of special circumstances and deserving of a pass. Failure to recognize this can never lead to fruitful discussion, and is furthermore a dangerous slippery slope towards an even more divided discussion. Fact of the matter is that everybody wants to be good, and wants good for *everybody*, in the way that they think best. What they think best is highly dependent on way to many factors to recount here, or anywhere for that matter.

The reason why everybody is in emphasis in the previous paragraph is because it's not quite true. Or it is, if you think that the in-group have special human rights that the out-group doesn't want/doesn't deserve. And it brings us into the final, and perhaps most central point as to why discussing things is such a difficult task: systems. Systems are found everywhere, from large societal systems such as the judicial system; cultural, such as the gender system; the list is as endless as your creativity. The problem lies in the wildly different views we can have on these systems. Say you have a discussion with a friend on if it is just that the income gap is as wide as it is, and he says that some inequality will always exist. Suddenly, without conscious thought the discussion is not on inequality as an *issue* anymore but inequality as a *system*. And when you have a discussion about a system you are (if you're not actively trying to view other perspectives as we discussed above) without a doubt acting on your intuitive Us/Them tendencies. If you don't acknowledge that it is what you are doing, and consciously, rationally try to defend it, it is impossible to have a productive discussion. Instead you arrive at a place full of psychological biases and irrationality. The nightmare at relative's Christmas dinner when the drunk Uncle suddenly bellows out his view on abortion between bites of turkey.

As a last point, which mostly applies to politics, is the issue on *centrism*, or indifference. This skews the discussion towards those who justifies the existence of specific systems. This is because you are part of that system, and indifference is indirect support towards it. I think it's fine to not care if a system exists or not, but you should be aware what the implications of that particular system of discussion means. Again, perspective taking. In the words of Elie Wiesel: *"The opposite of love is not hate, it is indifference."*

While all of this sounds inherently political, it really isn't. What it really is shining some light on an inherent psychological bias, that we cannot overcome, but can, and must work towards doing consciously. Freud said that we are driven by our unconscious drives, I say that we can at least put our hands on the steering wheel and open our eyes, trying to pry it from our unconscious stiff hands. 
