---
title: Reason - the Judas of right-wing politics
tag: politics
layout: post
---

> *"Even when regulating his existence man feels as if the waves of event had drawn him beyond his depth in the turbulent ocean of history and as if he now had to find a foothold in the drifting whirlpool. What was firm and certain has nowehere remained the ultimate. Morality is no longer adequately founded on generally valid laws. The laws themselves are in need of a deeper foundation."* Jaspers, excerpt from 'Existensialism --- From Dostoyevsky to Sartre'

The goal of any political ideology is to give to people an idea of progression, a goal to move toward. All ideologies also give an account of how society is constituted, what needs to change to give way for the proposed idea of progress, and what needs to remain static. Something that I find interesting is the way that human nature is portrayed in political ideologies[^1], and how that human nature stands in comparison to science. 

In left-wing politics a human being is portrayed as an autonomous being capable of bringing change into the world, change through the transformation of fundamental structures of society - like in our preconceived notions about gender, economics, family etc. Something also worth noting here is that while we are autonomous we are also at the mercy of those systems around us to form us into the persons that we become. We are therefore autonomous, but at the same time codependent on our environment around us. 

In right-wing politics a human being is also portrayed as an autonomous being capable of bringing change into the world, but not through changing the fundamental structures of society(which some right-wing people either don't believe exist or that they are immutable aspects of human nature). And here the point that I am trying to make fits in: that this view, that humans are capable of bringing change into the world through appeasing to our intrinsic rationality, i.e. that we, our egos, are supposedly independent from the environment, is a dangerous way of looking at the world. Part of me wants to go as far to claim that right-leaning politics is un-scientific in its proposal of progress, compared to what science has taught us about human psychology. The reason for me being so harsh in my wording here is two-fold: i.) right-wing politics emphasizes reason as the harbinger of progress, which is a fundamentally flawed assumption and ii.) right-wing politics ignores the idea that we are formed by our habits, by our ruts, rather than vice-versa, an idea that I find dangerous to ignore. 

*Reason* is the pinnacle of humanity in right-wing politics. The reason for this is because if we want to promote a political ideology that is based on ultimate individuality then we need something to base that individuality on. Otherwise we would have to be forced to conclude that we are affected by our environment, which in turns means that we would be forced to accept that there are systems, which would mean that right-wing politics would be forced to come with a solution to that problem - which stands contradicting the fundamental tenets of that ideology. Therefore we need something, something innate in every human being to base that politic theory on, and that something is most often *reason*.

The problem with this I think is obvious. Reason is really bad if we use it the way that we intuitively think that we should use it. In their 2018 book *The enigma of reason* Hugo Mercier and Dan Sperber laid out their theory on reason: we form intuitions first, independent from reason, and then use reason to rationalize those intuitions. So reason is primarily used to rationalize and justify oneself in the eyes of others; as well as to spot gaps in other peoples' reason. Throughout history(with examples like the Dreyfus affair), and in experiments this theory has been shown to be able to explain the discrepancy between our intuitions about what reason is and does, and what it actually *has* done throughout history. It evolved not for us to become autonomous individuals, independent from our surroundings, but to solve problems in social interaction (like the detection of cheaters, something proposed by Sapolsky in his book 'Behave'). So the real 'enigma of reason' is not really reason itself, but the way in how we perceive it and focus on using it.

From here it is easy to see why this brings a problem to the fundamental idea behind right-wing politics: that we are autonomous in virtue of the power of reason. Perhaps one could respond by saying that we instead of changing a *societal structure* to better accommodate and work with this idea of reason, promote *individual* use of reason, perhaps by education; and then leaving the rest up to individual responsibility. This is something that I think has some merit, but undermines itself due to its premise. In accepting that we sometimes have to be taught something through an institution it seems that you also accept that human nature is, in some degree, malleable. This is too contradictory to the way most right-wingers perceive human nature. When it comes to fundamental aspects like this you can't have the cake and eat it too. 

But let us put that aside for now. Perhaps it is true that we can form a new understanding and usage of reason in the political sphere without the need of change(or acceptance of the existence of) of fundamental structures in society. This still ignores a common assumption of human nature: that we consciously form our habits, rather than the other way around. This idea is something that philosophers throughout history have played with throughout history, but for the sake of argument let's focus on Confucius. Confucius said that nothing is innate when we are born. What we become depends on how we live our life, and what kind of situations we happen to be in. What he said, then, is that while at first we might respond to any given event by the current emotion[^2] we quickly start forming patterns. Patterns that govern our response to similar events, not from the emotion felt, but by the similarity itself.

This is, if true(which I think at the very least requires some additional thought about), is something that's contradictory to what right-wing politics says about human nature: that through reason we find the person lying in wait within, the person waiting for us to *discover* them. The underlying assumption here is that what the self is, what *I* am, is something independent from what I *do*. 

This idea of the self would also contradict the right-wing idea of society's role in promoting individual growth. And if we combine this with the view of reason presented above then we find ourselves at a point where right-wing politics seems to be undermined by supposed truths about human psychology. This is a point that to me seems inescapable, unless we postulate some additional political ideas about how to counter this - which I haven't yet seen from any person on the right.

Instead I think creating a better political system must involve a change to how we look at society's role in forming us as individuals. It must also do so from the basis of what we currently know about human psychology to create that society, in order to help and promote individual progress by working with that psychology and not against it. This would involve such things as changing the fundamental structures of society in order to make it easier for us to observe what our habits are and change them, which in turn changes ourselves for the better. 

When Margaret Thatcher said that: 

> *"There's no such thing as society. There are individual men and women, and there are families. And no government can do anything except through people, and people must look to themselves first."*

She was right, in a way. Society is what we make of it, and it becomes what we construct it to be. But because we construct it, we must also realize that as our creation it is flawed like we are. Flaws that we can learn from, and apply those lessons to what we think society is and can be. But it can never become that if we don't look to ourselves and ask ourself the question on what our flaws are. When it comes to reason especially we need to work in accordance with it, which we do best through appending our current societal structures to better use that innate ability - and not through some game of make-believe where we think that the abilities that we possess as human beings can be bent to any will. We are humans after all, and no government can do anything except through people, and therefore we must look to ourselves first. Which in this case means accepting that who we are, fundamentally, are flawed beings. Flaws that in the case of reason can best be worked with by appending the social structures.

<!-- footnotes -->


[^1]: At this point it is worth mentioning that of course left-wing, right-wing, anarchistic etc. politics are not uniform ideologies but they have some common elements running throughout them; and in the context of this discussion I find it does not effect the points that I am trying to make.

[^2]: Because the usage of the word 'emotion' in the context of political discussion is rather controversial I thought that I would explain here what I mean by that word in this context. Here it is not the basis of a rational argument, nor a reason, but only the emotional *response* by any given situation; which is something impossible to deny happens to every situation that befalls us. 
