---
title: Happiness & Desire - Hot Take
layout: post
tag: rambling
---

>*"There is no quality in human nature, which causes more fatal errors in our conduct, than that which leads us to prefer whatever is present to the distant and remote, and makes us desire objects more according to their situation than their intrinsic value."[^1]*

Humans are irrational creatures of relativity, we never deal in intrinsic value especially not in happiness. In experiments on rats, which are often used to determine behaviors in humans, it has been shown that *intrinsic* value of dopamine isn't effective in determining happiness[^2], but habit, the expected value. Take away some of the dopamine that you get in on a regular basis and you feel much less happy, relative to say one employing a Stoic practitioner who "self-regulates" what he gets pleasure from, or perhaps in better words, what he allows himself to indulge in. Life is a constant battle between choices, in terms of happiness the choice between short-term rushes of indulgence, or long-term, the slow burn. This is what - in my opinion - many philosophers talk about when they say that we are to find a purpose with which to aim our lives toward. 

Indulging in short-term bursts are not taboo in any sense, but it is crucial to think about what could be the consequences of that action. Is smoking cigarettes something that I really *want* to be doing, just because I desire it? The habit will make me lose several years of my life in the long run, all for the short-term burst of dopamine. With that in mind, something that is much more powerful than the indulging - and which we seldom think about in that way - is the desire itself. The moment before indulging is the time where we feel the most pleasure, it is often disappointing to *do* the indulging, the intense desire is the real drug. You could interpret this as the fear of not being happy, the fear of suffering which all of us undergo. If I don't feel happy now there is a chance that I might never feel it again. A natural instinct that long ago used to benefit our survival, letting us go just a little bit further even when we thought it impossible, for that single piece of food or whatever it might be. In the modern world, however, there is little need for this instinct; at least if you are one of the lucky few with a roof over their head and food on their table. Without straying too far from the discussion I want to focus on the desire itself, and how it isn't as bad as it might seem. Having the desire for things is, in my opinion, not reason enough to indulge in it, as I think most people would agree in at least some part with; however where I might lose some is when I say that the only way to deal with that desire is through the desire itself. Or as the old Zen proverb by Miyamoto Musashi states it: *"Under the sword lifted high, there is hell making you tremble; but go ahead, and you have the land of bliss."*[^3]

Then there is also the discussion about pride. Why do you feel proud doing certain things and less proud with others? I think it is about the *intent* with how you performed the action. Did I perform the action based on the intent of being *good* - whatever that means to me - or did I do it through false intent, rationalizing it through the intuitive desire? In my opinion, it is a powerful question to ask, and a very difficult one as well that very well can lead down a rabbit hole full of self-doubt; however, I don't think that rationalizes *not* thinking in those terms. 

Thus the denial of certain urges is not because you are denying yourself to be alive, but choosing exactly how you want to live life. Is it the indulging or the desire that really shows you that you are alive? I would say the latter, life is about desire, about wanting things. The sad truth is that we will never be satisfied if we go down the road toward *maximizing* happiness, indulging at our body's whim. Thus, reevaluating what you think that life should be about, what brings you happiness - and what doesn't should be the goal. Truly living life on your own terms. 

[^1]: Hume, David, and Ernest C. Mossner. *A Treatise of Human Nature*. Reprinted. Penguin Classics. London: Penguin Books, 1985.
[^2]: Sapolsky, Robert M. Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst. New York, New York: Penguin Press, 2017.
[^3]: [http://www.davar.net/ZEN/QUOTES.HTM](http://www.davar.net/ZEN/QUOTES.HTM)

